Brisbane ( (listen) BRIZ-bən), sited on the Meanjin ( ) land of the Turrbal Country, is the capital and most populous city of the Australian state of Queensland, and the third-most populous city in Australia. Brisbane's metropolitan area has a population of around 2.6 million, and it lies at the centre of the South East Queensland metropolitan region, which encompasses a population of around 3.8 million. The Brisbane central business district is situated within a peninsula of the Brisbane River about 15 km (9 mi) from its mouth at Moreton Bay, a bay of the Coral Sea. The metropolitan area extends in all directions along the hilly floodplain of the Brisbane River Valley between Moreton Bay and the Taylor and D'Aguilar mountain ranges. It sprawls across several of Australia's most populous local government areas (LGAs) — most centrally the City of Brisbane, the most populous LGA in the nation.
The city is named for the Brisbane River on which it stands, which is in turn named for Sir Thomas Brisbane, the governor of New South Wales at the time of the city's founding. The Moreton Bay penal settlement was founded in 1824 at Redcliffe as a place for secondary offenders from the Sydney colony, and soon moved to North Quay in 1825. Christian missionaries established Zion Hill in 1838, and by 1842 the region opened to free settlement. Brisbane was chosen as the capital when Queensland separated from New South Wales in 1859, and by the late 19th century had grown into a major port city and centre of immigration. During World War II, Brisbane played a central role in the Allied campaign and served as the South West Pacific headquarters for United States Army General Douglas MacArthur.Brisbane is classified as a global city (Beta +), and is an advanced centre of research and innovation in the Asia-Pacific. The city is promoted as Australia's capital of technology, with strengths in mining research and green energy, medicine and biotechnology, cryptocurrency and digital industries,  and robotics. A transport hub, Brisbane is served by a large urban rail network, bus and ferry networks, as well as Australia's largest and busiest airport, and the third largest seaport. The financial district is centered on Eagle Street.
A diverse city with 32.2% of its metropolitan population being foreign-born, the city consistently ranks as one of the world's most liveable cities. Noted for its cultural heritage and history, the city is home to numerous museums and galleries, events and festivals, theatre and music, city art and public monuments, and historic landmarks. Brisbane is known for its Queenslander architecture, its spring Jacaranda blossoms, and its outdoor dining and cuisine culture. Brisbane has hosted major events including the 1982 Commonwealth Games, World Expo 88 and the 2014 G20 summit and will host the 2032 Summer Olympics and Paralympics.Brisbane is a popular tourist destination. Major landmarks and attractions include South Bank Parklands and the Queensland Cultural Centre, including the Queensland Performing Arts Centre and Queensland Art Gallery and Gallery of Modern Art, the City Botanic Gardens, King George Square and City Hall, the Story Bridge, St John's Cathedral, the Mount Coot-tha Botanic Gardens and Lookout, Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary, Howard Smith Wharves, New Farm Park, D'Aguilar National Park, and Moreton Bay and its islands, including Moreton, North Stradbroke and St Helena.