Kakinada (formerly called Kakinandiwada, Coringa, Cocanada) listen  is the sixth largest city of the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh and serves as the district headquarters of the East Godavari district. It lies on the coast of the Bay of Bengal. J.N.T.U. College of Engineering Kakinada, established in 1946 is the oldest and popular Government college in the state of Andhra Pradesh. The First Polytechnic college of Andhra Pradesh, Andhra Polytechnic was established here in 1946. It has a canal named Buckingham Canal where goods used to be transported by boats during the British rule. It was once home for Asia's largest sea port (now near the village Coringa). Many people from the city migrated from this sea port to countries like Burma, Mauritius, Fiji and various southeast Asian countries to work there as workers where they were called as Coringas. They still live in those countries, learn Telugu and practice the Andhra culture.
Kakinada is known for its sweet called kaja which became a famous recipe in South India known as Kakinada Kaja. Apart from this, it is also known for food. There is a cuisine named "Subbayya Gari Hotel" which is known in South India for its authentic Vegetarian meals. The city is also home to a snack called Bajji which is famous throughout the state. Along with these it is mostly known for its town planning, one of the most greatly well planned towns in the entire country. The Indian Standard Time (IST) exactly passes through this city in the southern part of India. Hope Island, which lies just off the city's coast, naturally acts as a barrier and protects the city from cyclones and tsunami effects which also serves as a tourist spot.
It used to have more than 15 cinema theatres along a road (for which it has a dedicated road named after that as Cinema Road) and is known as Second Madras (because Madras [now Chennai], used to have many cinema theatres along a road). It also has a dedicated road for temples known as Temple street which justifies its status as the best-planned city. It is also known for its pleasant climate and recreating atmosphere for which, it is also known as Pensioner's Paradise indicating as a place to settle for mental peace and health. It is also a gateway for a region called Konaseema which is regarded as Second Kerala which is very famous for its scenic Coconut Trees and picturesque green farm fields surrounded by River Gouthami just like Kerala. It also has the second largest Mangrove forests in India near a village named Coringa which serves as a great tourist spot in Coringa Wildlife Sanctuary. It also has one of the oldest and biggest Government Hospitals of the state known as Government General Hospital, Kakinada.
Due to the love for Cinema and arts it had for years, the city is also home for many Telugu Cinema (Tollywood) Film Celebrities namely Suryakantham, Rao Gopal Rao, Relangi, P.B.Srinivas, C.S.Rao, Chitti Babu, P.Adinarayana Rao, Chaganti Koteswara Rao, Krishna Bhagawan, Goutham Raju, Ohmkar, Anchor Shyamala, Singer Anjana Sowmya, Pavala Syamala.
Culturally, the city has a popular dialect known as Godavari Dialect which is one of the most famous dialects of Andhra Pradesh. Politically, it is also a very important seat of power as there is a sentiment of forming the Government in Andhra Pradesh if won in this region. It is also close to many famous holy temples of the district.
It is one of the three smart cities of Andhra Pradesh under Smart Cities Mission. A second new port is being constructed by GMR Group which will become the biggest port in the state. A Petroleum Complex is constructed by the Indian government as the region is full of gas and petroleum resources. It is one of the most rapidly developing cities of the India.