Malang (; Javanese: ꦏꦸꦛꦩꦭꦁ read : Kutha Malang) is a landlocked city in the Indonesian province of East Java. It has a history dating back to the age of Singhasari Kingdom. It is the second most populous city in the province, with a population of 820,043 at the 2010 Census and 843,810 at the 2020 Census. Its metropolitan area is home to 3,663,691 inhabitants in 2010, spread across two cities and 22 districts (21 in Malang Regency and one in Pasuruan Regency). Malang is the third largest city by economy in East Java, after Surabaya and Kediri, with an estimated 2016 GDP at Rp. 44.30 trillion.The city is well known for its mild climate. During Dutch colonization, it was a popular destination for European residents. Even now, Malang still holds its position as a popular destination for international tourists. Malang keeps various historical relics. This city keeps relics of the Kingdom of Kanjuruhan period until the Dutch period. The existence of Dutch heritage in general is in the form of ancient buildings such as the Kayutangan church and Ijen cathedral which has gothic architecture. Malang also holds various events to preserve its cultural heritage, one of them is Malang Tempo Doeloe Festival. There's also a lot of historical heritage which has become a landmark like Tugu Malang (Alun-alun Bundar). This city is also well known because of its label as an educational city. It has one of the best universities in Indonesia such as Brawijaya University and Malang State University.Malang has various ethnic groups and cultures from all over Indonesia and the world. The population of Malang reaches 895,387 people with a majority of Javanese, followed by the Madurese, and Chinese or Peranakan. Malang extended urban area or notable known as Malang Raya, is the second largest in East Java after Gerbangkertosusila (Surabaya Metropolitan Area). From Javanese culture point of view, the majority of Malang people belongs to Arekan Javanese culture.Malang was spared many of the effects of the Asian financial crisis and since that time it has been marked by steady economic and population growth.