Muzaffarnagar  (pronunciation ) (Old Name- Sarwat{Established During Mughal Period}) is a city under Muzaffarnagar Urban Metropolitan Region and is controlled by municipal board in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh.  It is the headquarters of the Muzaffarnagar district. It is situated midway on Delhi - Haridwar/Dehradun National Highway (NH 58), the city is also well connected with the national railway network. It is known as sugarbowl of UP.
The city previously called Sarwat(Established During Mughal Period) is located in the middle of highly fertile upper Ganga-Yamuna Doab region and is very near to the New Delhi and Saharanpur, making it one of the most developed and prosperous cities of Uttar Pradesh. It comes under the Saharanpur division . This city is part of Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC) and Amritsar Delhi Kolkata Industrial Corridor (ADKIC). It share its border with state of  Uttarakhand.  It is the principal commercial, industrial and educational hub of Western Uttar Pradesh. As of July 2021, Chandra Bhushan Singh, IAS is the District Magistrate of Muzaffarnagar.
          Before the Sarwat established by Mughala, Muzaffarnagar city is a rural area known as Aryapuri situated itself in the city presently area of aryapuri surrounding by one temple; the Hindu priest well known for wisdom; told as stories of various Hindu King justification in form of stories.  the wisdom of science avilable of that time were also hold in many stories, the most of stories are based on human efforts against the odd, most valued stories of Panchtantra originates from that time present priest. This because the Chatritya those were involved in the security of temple & the Hindu King used to keep the specific pet "Chitta" for security & keep fit them salves safe, the evolve of Sports for even girls are the main stream of Hindu sports culture to keep fit the socity of that time, later these efforts become various village society & there effort were become there survival instinct.

the effort made by chatriya were also parts of that time stories.

During Mughal migration with army of Mughal in India the Brahmin & chatriya were left the temple & surrounding area & their home, divided in different direction like a sun spreading light's rays of hope separated fall in the forest thus the Mughal easily captured the village /town at that period "Aryapuri" later Mughal follow them to adjust with the Hindu religion during Birtania kingdom over take from Mughal as ruler, to understand these situation the various village established at different arc of 360 degree surroding Muzaffarnagar is the research able; as that time need & socio-economy adjustment with the reforms of Mughal kingdom later Britania kingdom is the evidence of evolving sarwat now as Muzaffarnagar.
         By: "A longitudinal studies of Indian Athletics" Pramod Kumar Singh (IAAF Lecturer), Muzaffarnagar.