Mysore ( (listen)), officially Mysuru ([ˈmaɪ'suːɾu] (listen); Kannada: ಮೈಸೂರು), is a city in the southern part of the state of Karnataka, India. Mysore city is geographically located between 12° 18′ 26″ north latitude and 76° 38′ 59″ east longitude. It is located at an altitude of 770 m (2,530 ft) above mean sea level.
Mysore is situated at the foothills of Chamundi Hills about 145.2 km (90 mi) towards the southwest of Bangalore and spread across an area of 155 km2 (60 sq mi). Mysore City Corporation is responsible for the civic administration of the city, which is also the headquarters of Mysore district and Mysore division.
It served as the capital city of the Kingdom of Mysore for nearly six centuries from 1399 until 1956. The Kingdom was ruled by the Wadiyar dynasty, with a brief period of interregnum in the late 18th century when Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan were in power. The Wadiyars were patrons of art and culture. Tipu Sultan and Hyder Ali also contributed significantly to the cultural and economic growth of the city and the state by planting mulberry trees introducing silk in the region and fighting four wars against the British. The cultural ambience and achievements of Mysore earned it the sobriquet of Cultural Capital of Karnataka.
Mysore is noted for its heritage structures and palaces, including the Mysore Palace, and for the festivities that take place during the Dasara festival when the city receives hundreds of thousands of tourists from around the world. It lends its name to various art forms and culture, such as Mysore Dasara, Mysore painting; the sweet dish Mysore Pak, Mysore Masala Dosa; brands such as Mysore Sandal Soap, Mysore Paints and Varnish Limited; and styles and cosmetics such as Mysore Peta (a traditional silk turban) and the Mysore silk saris. Mysore is also known for its special variety of jasmine flower fondly referred as "Mysore Mallige" and betel leaves. Tourism is the major industry alongside the traditional industries. Mysore's inter-city public transportation includes rail, bus and flights.